Benchmarking/Readme.md, before:

## Benchmarking

info about why benchmarking and refer to paper


## Content datafiles

Data is stored as a json file. This json file contains non-dimensionalised data
in the following structure.

- ik: matrix with inverse kinematics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- ik_std: matrix with standard deviation inverse kinematics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- ik_header: header inverse kinematics
- id: matrix with inverse dynamics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- id_std: matrix with standard deviation inverse dynamics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- id: header inverse dynamics
- grf_r: matrix with ground reaction force on right leg (nfr x 3)
- grf_r_std: matrix with std ground reaction force on right leg
- grf_l: matrix with ground reaction force on left leg (nfr x 3)
- grf_l_std: matrix with std ground reaction force on left leg (nfr x 3)
- grf_header: header GRF (default is {'Fx','Fy','Fz'};
- stride_frequency: stride frequency
- Pmetab_mean: mean metabolic power
- subject_height: (average) height of participant(s) (in meter !)
- subject_mass: (average) mass of the participant(s) (in kg !)
- speed: walking speed in m/s
- slope: slope (e.g. slope = 0.08 for walking on an 8% incline)
- added_mass:  total added mass to subject (in kg)
- location_added_mass: name of body (without _l or _r)
- study: name of the study (e.g. browning2008)

Feel free to add other outputs (like exoskeleton, exoskeleton_controller) to this. Everything you forget 
to add will be treated as empty.

Tot nondim outputs based on:
- frequency:  sqrt(g/l)
- moments:    m*g*l
- forces:     m*g
- Pmetab:     m*g^1.5*sqrt(l)

## identifier for simulation

We use an unique identifier for each experimental condition and the connected predictive simulation. This makes it easier to connect experimental data to simulation. This identifier is a string. If you add experimental data to () it would be nice to also add this identifier to the list below.



**Koelewijn 2019:**

- 0.8 m/s, 0% slope: **koelewijn2019_0p8ms**

- 1.3m/s, 0% slope: **koelewijn2019_1p3ms**

- 0.8, -8%slope: **koelewijn2019_0p8ms_8decline**

- 1.3, -8%slope: **koelewijn2019_1p3ms_8decline**

- 0.8, 8%slope: **koelewijn2019_0p8ms_8incline**

- 1.3, 8%slope: **koelewijn2019_1p3ms_8incline**


**Browning2008**

- xkg femur: browning2008_femurxkg
- xkg foot: browning2008_footxkg
- xkg pelvis: browning2008_pelvisxkg
- xkg tibia: browning2008_tibiaxkg

**VanDerZee2022**

- x speed (in m/s): vanderzee2022_xms 
- example: vanderzee2022_0p7ms for walking at 0.7 m/s


**Gomenuka2014**

- walking on slope x with added mass y at z m/s: gomenuka2014_slope_xpct_ykmh_mass_zpctmass
- example for walking on slope 7 percent at 3 km/h and 25% added mass: gomenuka_slope_7pct_3kmh_25pctmass


**Gait Speeds**
- walking at x m/s: gait_speeds_xms
- example: for walking at 0.85 ms: gait_speeds_0p85ms





### Idea benchmarking workflow

The main idea is that you can test your simulation workflow on a set of gait conditions and compare your simulations to experiments. 

**Input:**

- Simulation model

- Settings used for you simulations 

**Output**

- Simulation results

- experimental values associated with motion, preferably scaled for the person (non-dimentionalised for paper and re-computed for antropometry of specific model used in simulation)
  
  - spatio-temporal
  
  - kinematics
  
  - kinetics
  
  - metabolic power

**benchmark conditions:**

- gait at various speeds [Abe2025, VanDerZee?]

- walking on a slope [Koelewijn?, McDonald?]

- walking with added mass [schertzer dataset ?]

Commit message:

update functions to compare sim and exp

Benchmarking/Readme.md, after:

## Benchmarking

This tool enables you to compare predictive simulations with your model to several experiments (we call this benchmarking). We started with comparing simulations to several simple gait conditions (e.g. walking on a slope, walking with added mass to the ankles, ...). You can find more detailed information in the paper "benchmarking the predictive capability of human gait simulations, Afschrift et al 2025 (URL)".



The tools are quite simple

1. the matlab function *benchmark_predim.m* will execute predsim simulations for several gait conditions. If you want you can add new gait conditions to this function

2. You now have to compare you simulations to experimental data. The experimental data is stored in this repository ([GitHub - MaartenAfschrift/predsim_benchmark_data: data+ functions to compare predsim benchmark simulations with experiments](https://github.com/MaartenAfschrift/predsim_benchmark_data)). Please have a look at the readme of this repo if you want to use this data/contribute. You can now chose: write your own code to compare experiments to simulations or use my scripts that might be in some cases sufficients
   
   1. add_benchmarkdata_to_simresults.: matlab function simply loops over all simulations in your benchmarking results folder (S_benchmark.out_folder). Looks for the data that belongs to this simulation (from data repo) and adds a structure benchmarking to the results file. You can run this function when all simulations are finished. This function downloads the experimental data from the github repo automatically and saves it in PredSim/Benchmarking/Data.
   
   2. when running add_benchmarkdata_to_simresults with BoolPlot = true you also get some default figures







## Content datafiles

Data is stored as a json file. This json file contains non-dimensionalised data
in the following structure.

- ik: matrix with inverse kinematics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- ik_std: matrix with standard deviation inverse kinematics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- ik_header: header inverse kinematics
- id: matrix with inverse dynamics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- id_std: matrix with standard deviation inverse dynamics data for one gait cycle (nfr x ndof)
- id: header inverse dynamics
- grf_r: matrix with ground reaction force on right leg (nfr x 3)
- grf_r_std: matrix with std ground reaction force on right leg
- grf_l: matrix with ground reaction force on left leg (nfr x 3)
- grf_l_std: matrix with std ground reaction force on left leg (nfr x 3)
- grf_header: header GRF (default is {'Fx','Fy','Fz'};
- stride_frequency: stride frequency
- Pmetab_mean: mean metabolic power
- subject_height: (average) height of participant(s) (in meter !)
- subject_mass: (average) mass of the participant(s) (in kg !)
- speed: walking speed in m/s
- slope: slope (e.g. slope = 0.08 for walking on an 8% incline)
- added_mass:  total added mass to subject (in kg)
- location_added_mass: name of body (without _l or _r)
- study: name of the study (e.g. browning2008)

Feel free to add other outputs (like exoskeleton, exoskeleton_controller) to this. Everything you forget 
to add will be treated as empty.

Tot nondim outputs based on:

- frequency:  sqrt(g/l)
- moments:    m*g*l
- forces:     m*g
- Pmetab:     m*g^1.5*sqrt(l)

## identifier for simulation

We use an unique identifier for each experimental condition and the connected predictive simulation. This makes it easier to connect experimental data to simulation. This identifier is a string. If you add experimental data to () it would be nice to also add this identifier to the list below.

**Koelewijn 2019:**

- 0.8 m/s, 0% slope: **koelewijn2019_0p8ms**

- 1.3m/s, 0% slope: **koelewijn2019_1p3ms**

- 0.8, -8%slope: **koelewijn2019_0p8ms_8decline**

- 1.3, -8%slope: **koelewijn2019_1p3ms_8decline**

- 0.8, 8%slope: **koelewijn2019_0p8ms_8incline**

- 1.3, 8%slope: **koelewijn2019_1p3ms_8incline**

**Browning2008**

- xkg femur: browning2008_femurxkg
- xkg foot: browning2008_footxkg
- xkg pelvis: browning2008_pelvisxkg
- xkg tibia: browning2008_tibiaxkg

**VanDerZee2022**

- x speed (in m/s): vanderzee2022_xms 
- example: vanderzee2022_0p7ms for walking at 0.7 m/s

**Gomenuka2014**

- walking on slope x with added mass y at z m/s: gomenuka2014_slope_xpct_ykmh_mass_zpctmass
- example for walking on slope 7 percent at 3 km/h and 25% added mass: gomenuka_slope_7pct_3kmh_25pctmass

**Gait Speeds**

- walking at x m/s: gait_speeds_xms
- example: for walking at 0.85 ms: gait_speeds_0p85ms

### Idea benchmarking workflow

The main idea is that you can test your simulation workflow on a set of gait conditions and compare your simulations to experiments. 

**Input:**

- Simulation model

- Settings used for you simulations 

**Output**

- Simulation results

- experimental values associated with motion, preferably scaled for the person (non-dimentionalised for paper and re-computed for antropometry of specific model used in simulation)
  
  - spatio-temporal
  
  - kinematics
  
  - kinetics
  
  - metabolic power

**benchmark conditions:**

- gait at various speeds [Abe2025, VanDerZee?]

- walking on a slope [Koelewijn?, McDonald?]

- walking with added mass [schertzer dataset ?]
