Documentation/README.md, before:


Documentation
=============

The PredSim documentation is available on [the website](https://kuleuvenneuromechanics.github.io/PredSim/).

The [/source](./source) folder contains the source files for the website.
Source files are written in [reStructuredText](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/index.html) (preferred) or [markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/).

## Updating the website

Updating the website consists of 3 steps.
1. Update the source files
2. Build the html files
3. Deploy to github pages

### 1. Update the source files
Open the files in [/source](./source) in a text editor or IDE and edit them.
Mind the different syntax between [.rst](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/index.html) and [.md](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) files.

### 2. Build the html files

The html files for the website can be build by running the [build_website workflow](../.github/workflows/build_website.yml) through [github actions](https://github.com/KULeuvenNeuromechanics/PredSim/actions/workflows/build_website.yml). This creates an *artifact* github-pages.zip that can be downloaded.
github-pages.zip contains artifact.tar, which contains the website files. Open index.html with a browser to preview the website.

The html files for the website can also be build locally.
First, set up a python environment, e.g. with anaconda.
- `conda create -n website`
- `conda activate website`
- `python -m pip install --upgrade pip`
- `cd c/path/to/PredSim/Documentation`
- `pip install -r requirements.txt`

After it is set up, access it via
- `conda activate website`
- `cd c/path/to/PredSim/Documentation`

To build the website files in *build/html*, run `sphinx-build -M html source/ build/`.

To build an interactive preview that updates when you change the source files, run `sphinx-autobuild source/ build/`.





### 3. Deploy to github pages

Pushing a change to the master branch (i.e. merging a pull request) will run the [deploy workflow](../.github/workflows/deploy.yml).
This workflow builds and deploys the website based on the updated source files in the master branch.

Commit message:

add source info to docs readme

Documentation/README.md, after:


Documentation
=============

The PredSim documentation is available on [the website](https://kuleuvenneuromechanics.github.io/PredSim/).

The [/source](./source) folder contains the source files for the website.
Source files are written in [reStructuredText](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/index.html) (preferred) or [markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/).

## Updating the website

Updating the website consists of 3 steps.
1. Update the source files
2. Build the html files
3. Deploy to github pages

### 1. Update the source files
Open the files in [/source](./source) in a text editor or IDE and edit them.
Mind the different syntax between [.rst](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/index.html) and [.md](https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/) files.

- [`conf.py`](./source/conf.py) contains general information about the project and determines the overal layout of the website.
- [`index.rst`](./source/index.rst) serves as the home page of the website and contains the table of contents. The table of contents describes the structure of the website, and contains links to all other source files.
- The [`_static` folder](./source/_static/) contains all images for the website.

### 2. Build the html files

The html files for the website can be build by running the [build_website workflow](../.github/workflows/build_website.yml) through [github actions](https://github.com/KULeuvenNeuromechanics/PredSim/actions/workflows/build_website.yml). This creates an *artifact* github-pages.zip that can be downloaded.
github-pages.zip contains artifact.tar, which contains the website files. Open index.html with a browser to preview the website.

The html files for the website can also be build locally.
First, set up a python environment, e.g. with anaconda.
- `conda create -n website`
- `conda activate website`
- `python -m pip install --upgrade pip`
- `cd c/path/to/PredSim/Documentation`
- `pip install -r requirements.txt`

After it is set up, access it via
- `conda activate website`
- `cd c/path/to/PredSim/Documentation`

To build the website files in *build/html*, run `sphinx-build -M html source/ build/`.

To build an interactive preview that updates when you change the source files, run `sphinx-autobuild source/ build/`.





### 3. Deploy to github pages

Pushing a change to the master branch (i.e. merging a pull request) will run the [deploy workflow](../.github/workflows/deploy.yml).
This workflow builds and deploys the website based on the updated source files in the master branch.
